Hi there.
This is Lulu.
Now, let's take a look at threat interruption, which is also related to threat cooperation.
So for the threads that we looked at stopped because they ran to completion.
But sometimes we would like to stop a particular task or a thread before they run to completion.
For instance, in our indexing program, if the web page is taking too long to download, then we may
like to stop that particular thread.
You may recall from one of our earlier demos that one of the downloaded threads was blocked as it could
not download the page due to some issue on the web server and we had to manually stop the program instead
of stopping that thread explicitly.
Similarly, when a user clicks on a cancel button in the user interface, then the corresponding thread
may have to be stopped.
Yet another reason could be that an application needs to be shut down quickly due to some performance
reasons.
Say there was some memory leak and we are running out of memory which is causing the slowness in the
response time of the application.
In this case, we may want to restart the web server and in the process stop any background threads
that are running on the server.
For instance, we may have background threads doing some important computation and we might want to
stop them explicitly so that the thread could terminate in a graceful way rather than terminate them
abruptly during the middle of the computation.
Java does not provide a mechanism for forcing a threat to stop.
The third class has a method named Stop for forcibly stopping a thread, but it has been deprecated
along with a few other methods like suspend and resume.
You can look at the thread class's API for information on these methods.
So Java instead provides interruption, which is a cooperative mechanism for requesting a thread to
stop what it is doing.
So the next question would be why Georgia allows a cooperative mechanism rather than forcing it to stop.
Forcing a terror to stop immediately can leave any shared objects in an inconsistent state.
So a cooperative way would allow the target thread to perform any cleanup operation before termination.
So it would allow the target thread to terminate in a graceful way.
Generally, such cleanup operations are often ignored, which can lead to serious problems.
You may recall this example from our lecture on volatile variables where we used a volatile boolean
variable to stop a threat.
Here.
Within the main method, we are creating a new thread which simply prints some text in a loop.
The loop stops iterating when stop is set to true by the main thread, which is done after about 1/2.
And with that, the thread terminates as it runs to completion.
So this is one way to stop a threat.
However, this may not be applicable in certain scenarios.
For instance, if a threat gets into states like waiting or time waiting or blocked due to invocation
of blocking methods such as weight, sleep or joint, then we really do not know when they would get
back into the running state and check the stop flag for such scenarios.
Interruption is the solution.
And now let's look at interruption.
Every thread has a bullion interrupted status, which is by default, false.
And the threat class has this method called us interrupt and if we invoke this method on a thread,
then the interrupted status of that thread would be set to true.
And it is basically a signal to the thread to stop what it is doing at its own convenience.
That is, it is up to the thread on how it responds to this request.
No blocking methods like sleep or weight try to detect when a threat has been interrupted and they try
to return early.
Essentially, they respond by clearing the interrupter status that is, resetting the interrupted status
to false and also throwing an interrupted exception.
You may recall that in our demos we enclosed blocking method calls like Sleep or weight with try catch
blocks with the exception handling code involved an interrupted exception.
Such interrupted status has been set to true and target method executed a blocking method.
Then it would throw an interrupted exception after resetting the status flag to false.
Similarly, even if a thread is already in states like waiting or time waiting or blocked, it will
respond by resetting the status flag and throwing the interrupted exception, indicating that it has
been interrupted.
On the catch block, handling the interrupted exception can include any cleanup code.
Just note that there is no guarantee on how quickly a thread detects interruption, although in practice
it happens pretty fast.
Now, if the path that your program takes does not involve a blocking operation, then you could do
something like this in order to terminate.
The while condition would invoke is interrupted method, which is also from the threat class and it
would return it true if the interrupted status is set to true.
And here's an alternative way is interpret method is just replaced with interrupted, which is also
another method from the thread class.
And this month it clears the interrupter status and it would return the previous value of the status
flag.
If the method returns true, then the loop would terminate.
Not that interrupted is the only method that can be used for resetting the interrupted status flag.
Finally note that if a threat is blocked due to the use of stream war, then that particular threat
is uninterruptible.
What it means is if the thread is waiting for some data from the source, then the thread is uninterruptible.
However, there is a workaround for this, and the workaround is that we need to close the stream and
that would cause an exception to be thrown.
So that's how we would interrupt the thread.
Soon we will look at this through a demo.
Similarly, if a threat is blocked due to an intrinsic lock that is either a synchronised method or
a synchronised block, then once again, the threat is uninterruptible.
There's an alternative.
You can use something called explicit locks and threats.
Waiting on them can be interruptible.
We will look at explicit locks to.
Finally, if a threat is blocked due to the use of an IWO rather than stream IWO, then the threat is
interruptible.
Now let's go ahead and look at threat interruption in action.
Okay.
For this demo, let's start off by looking at a very simple example of using the interrupt method.
So we will look at two programs.
First, one would be a very simple program, and the second one would be a slightly more complicated
example.
So for the first program, we are just looking at the same example that we have seen earlier.
It's called the My First Threat Class, which is one of the first classes that we wrote here.
And this particular class, all it is doing is it has the main method.
And within the main method we are spawning a new thread and the variable is named as thread itself and
we are starting that thread.
And in that thread all we are doing is we are invoking the go method, a method called go, which is
in turn invoking a method called more.
But that is not relevant here for this demo.
And the main method would then sleep for 3 seconds and would print this message called Inside Main.
So what we will do is we will we will copy this code where we are sleeping for 3 seconds and we will
make the other thread sleep for around 9 seconds.
So the main thread is sleeping for 3 seconds, the other thread is sleeping for 9 seconds.
And then from the main thread we will invoke the interrupt method on this variable thread.
So that way that sleeping the thread is an sleeping state that is the timed underscore waiting state.
And when we invoke the interrupt method, it should interrupt that particular thread, it should interrupt
this thread.
So let's go ahead and do that.
So let me just copy this.
And let's insert it here in the run method.
It's made this nine.
So in the catch block, let's just print this statement interrupt.
Now let's head over to the main method.
So after it slips for 3 seconds, let's invoke thread.
Thread is the variable name here.
And let's invoke the interrupt method and you can also see the other methods interrupted and is interrupted.
But this is the method that we invoke and that would set the interrupted status to true.
And so let's go ahead and run this.
So as you can see, after about 3 seconds, the main thread is invoking this interrupt and the second
thread is being interrupted.
So we are printing the message interrupted.
So that's the interrupt method.
So that's the first program.
Now, let's look at another program here.
It's called us.
Wait, notify with incomplete interruption.
So it's basically an extension of the wait notify indexer method, which we have seen earlier and we
have interruption here.
So we incorporated interruption, but I call it as incomplete because there is some limitation here.
Because of that, I call it as incomplete.
And in order to fix that, we may have to look at explicit locks, which is the subject of next lecture.
So that's why it's called us incomplete.
And most likely we can also have an assignment on that on this where you can actually fix that.
But we will look at that later.
For now, it's just called us with incomplete interruption.
So let's go ahead and look at what changes have been made in this program, which was originally very
notify indexer program itself.
As discussed in the lecture, we want to stop that thread if it is taking too long to download a page.
If you recall, that was one of the examples that we stated why we want to stop a thread.
And if you recall, we have the downloader thread which is responsible for downloading the web page
and we also have the indexer thread, which is for indexing the downloaded web page.
Right.
So that's what we have.
And we have the main method which is invoking this method called Let's Go.
And in the in the go method, if you recall, we were creating the downloader thread, the indexer thread,
and we were iterating through all the web links and we were creating for each of the web links.
We are creating these two threads now.
Additionally, what we are doing is we want to store these threads so that we can later invoke the interrupt
method.
So for storing we want to store them in a data structure so we have an array list.
So I created two or less.
One is called a downloader thread list and the other one is indexer thread list.
So these are our lists.
Basically they just store downloaded threads and indexer threads.
Indexer thread list will store only indexer threads.
And here each of these threats are also given a name.
We are just saying download a thread with ID for the download or thread.
We are saying download the thread with ID and we are simply giving the name of the web link here get.
We are invoking the get ID method, so that would be the name of the download or thread and we are doing
the same with the indexer thread too.
So those are the two threads.
So just pay attention because this is a lot of code has been added.
So just pay more attention here.
So all we are doing is we are adding this threads to some URLs and after the wild loop we are sleeping
for 1/2 and within 1/2 we are expecting the thread to finish the downloading job.
Now if it doesn't download, if a particular thread doesn't download, then we need to interrupt it.
And that particular piece of code is written here.
So we are iterating through the download thread list and then we are fetching a thread and in a given
iteration and we are checking if it is alive.
So there is this is a line method and it would return true if the web page has not yet finished its
task.
If it has not run to completion, then it would return true.
So in that case we want to interrupt the thread.
However, instead of interrupting the download of thread, we would actually interrupt the corresponding
indexer thread and that would actually take care of of interrupting the other thread.
Now the download or thread, we know that we cannot interrupt it because if you recall from the lecture
we said that if the thread is using stream Ivo it is uninterruptible and the only way we can interrupt
it is by closing the stream.
And that's what is happening here because we are using stream Ivo actually to download the page and
so we cannot interrupt it unless we close the stream itself.
So that's what we are trying to do here.
So, so the indexer thread is being interrupted, but in the download thread we have some changes here.
So earlier we had this method called htp, connect, dot download and we were passing a URL.
Now we need access to the input stream.
So this is the downloader method, the downloader thread and we need access to the input stream so that
we can actually close it.
So that's why a new method has been written.
It's called us get input stream in the IP Connect class and that's already available in the resources
section.
So the input stream is here and then we need to close this input stream and for that we need to use
a different thread.
So we need to spawn a new thread.
So within this download thread what we are doing is here we are creating a new thread and this is mainly
responsible for closing the input string.
So we are spawning a new thread here.
Here it is and we are naming it as BG thread because it's a background thread and within the run method
we want to close that particular input stream based on some condition.
So we have a cancellation policy here and the policy is that after about 1/2, you know, this particular
thread, if it doesn't finish the task, the downloader that we need to close it.
So that's the policy.
Now after once again, we need to somehow make this thread.
If it is still if the downloading is not yet complete, then the thread should terminate and during
the process it needs to invoke the closed method on the input stream.
Input stream is basically iron.
So for that we also have this introduced a new variable inside the weblink object.
You can go here, here it is.
So it's basically a volatile variable stop and it will if we set the stop to true.
It means that the background thread don't know the thread has to be stopped and that is done by closing
the input string.
So this is a signal to the thread to stop.
So that's the main intention here.
Now if the E stop, if it returns.
False.
Then what, what this thread background thread does is it just leaps for 1/2 and then it wakes up and
once again it keeps checking this.
Now, if this variable is set to true stop variable is set to true, then it would exit this loop and
it would close the input string.
Now let's go down in this method.
So this is still the downloader class and here we have the download method.
So earlier we had the download method which was taking a URL of the web page, but now it is taking
an input stream.
So it's an overloaded method.
And so we have that.
And once it downloads, it sets the HTML page here.
Now, if the download completes in a normal way, but in that even in that case, we want to interrupt
the big thread, right?
Otherwise this big thread would still be running in the background.
And we want to close that.
And this is just the notify all method in the downloader.
And we also have the indexer method and in the indexer we are also waiting here.
So in the indexer method.
Now we have this catch block called interrupted exception because if you recall if here in the go method
we are actually invoking the interrupt method on if the downloader thread is alive after 1/2, then
we are invoking the interrupt method on the interrupted.
We are not doing it on downloader thread but the interrupted and in the interrupt thread because interrupt
and downloader thread are connected.
Right.
They are cooperating threads and the interrupt thread will actually be interrupted.
And if it is interrupted then this is the catch block of the interrupted thread.
And within the catch block we are doing some cleanup operation and the cleanup operation is nothing,
but it's nothing but setting this stop status to true.
And if we set the status to true then in the downloader thread we have the background thread and that
will check if the status if the stop flag is true and that will close the input stream and as soon as
it closes the input stream then the main, then the downloader thread which is actually.
Invoking the download method.
It is waiting there for the data that will throw an IO exception, and the IO exception is here and
we are printing this message saying that the webpage could not be downloaded and so we are terminating
as the stream is closed.
So it is being indirectly interrupted.
So that's that now.
So I think we can just go ahead and run it on this method.
So we are done with that.
So let's just look at this output here.
So the downloaded thread is trying to download these pages and one of the pages is actually completed
to 2003 and it's been indexed also.
Okay.
Then the big threat, because even after the the big threat is also interrupted, because even though
we are we have finished downloading the page, we are still calling.
After downloading it successfully, we are still invoking the interrupt method because we also want
this thread to be terminated.
We don't need this anymore so we can terminate it even on successfully downloading the webpage within
1/2.
Then here we are saying the time is up, which means that 1/2 has passed and there are some threats
which are which are still active.
So what it means is these three threats, 2000, 2001 and 2002.
So they are actually here.
They could not even enter in the indexer threat.
They are waiting here on the synchronized block, which is an intrinsic lock.
And even though the interrupt has been invoked, we know that in the lecture, if you recall, we said
that any threat waiting on an intrinsic log, which would be such synchronized blocks, in that case,
they would they will be uninterruptible.
They would still be waiting here.
And the block state itself, they're uninterruptible.
So there are three threats which are three indexer threats which are waiting here, but their corresponding
interrupt methods have already been invoked, but we are still waiting here.
So that's the limitation of this approach.
They are waiting here.
So even after that, the down their downloaded threats are still continuing to execute for these three
threats.
And we are seeing that 21 download is complete and then it is interrupted and then it is indexed here
because of this, because it would invoke the notify all and it would exit this loop and.
Yeah, because it would download the page.
And here in the indexer thread the we are having this file condition and if the HTML page is not equal
to null and then we are going to index this page.
So it just even though the time has passed, the 1/2 has passed, we are still downloading all the three
pages here.
So that's the problem with this, because all the three threads were actually waiting here itself.
Okay.
So that is the 1/2 limitation is not having any effect here.
Let me just run it one more time.
Yeah.
Now, this example is good.
I think this one is much better because here we are downloading.
But but if you can see here, here we are saying these two threats are actually these statements are
getting printed from the indexer thread.
And here we are saying 2000 not yet downloaded and it is waiting.
So these two threads, 2000 and 2002, they kicked in before the corresponding download threads.
So they came inside the synchronized and 2004 2000 and 2002 we are saying not yet downloaded.
And they go into the waiting state here.
Now let's go back here.
At the time is up and one of them was 2000.
So for 2000 the download has been complete.
But before invoking the notify all itself because interrupt method has already been called and under
to the the document with the ID 2000 is inside this weight method is waiting there.
So because and so the thread scheduler will actually interrupt this thread.
And because of that, so this page, this statement will not get executed and it will go into this interrupted
exception and it is performing this cleanup operation.
That's why it says Indexer interrupted here.
And it is the cleanup operation is to call this stop method set stop and it is setting the true.
So by doing so it will actually close the the other thread to the input stream.
So that's what is happening.
But for.
But what is happening here is after 1/2 the downloader thread is also downloading, has also finished
downloading the page concurrently.
So it's just a little bit difficult to simulate this.
If it was if the thread was waiting, if the the corresponding thread for 2000 for this ID 2000 if it
was waiting for for a few more seconds then we could have seen that where the input stream is closed
and that would force the thread to terminate.
So we are it's just a little bit difficult to show that here because these are all web pages and we
don't have control on how how they are going to respond.
So anyway, I think you might have got an idea about this.
You can also take a look at this program.
It will be in the resources section.
So the problem that we saw earlier was that the threads were actually waiting here.
And when they were waiting here, the indexer threads, we are unable to interrupt them.
So if we want to do that, then we need to use explicit locks.
And that way we'll see in the next lecture.
That's all for now.
Thank you and happy coding.